README: tdbcpostgres

    This is the 1.1.3 source distribution of the driver for Tcl
    Database Connectivity (TDBC) to access Postgres databases. TDBC and
    its drivers are available from a Fossil version control repository
    at http://tdbc.tcl.tk/

RCS: @(#) $Id: $

1. Introduction

This directory contains the source code, documentation, and test
scripts for the Postgres driver for Tcl Database Connectivity. This
module, plus TDBC itself, allow you to access Postgres databases using
a standard application programming interface (API) from a Tcl script.
This module is also available from http://tdbc.tcl.tk along with the
source code of TDBC itself. A bug database and Wiki are available at
the same location.

Tdbc::postgres is a freely-available open source package.  You can do
virtually anything you like with it, such as modifying it,
redistributing it, and selling it either in whole or in part.  See the
file "license.terms" for complete information.

2. Compilation and Installation

This module follows the general configuration and installation
rules described in the README file for tdbc. Prior to running
'configure', you should ensure that the directory that contains
the Postgres executables (specifically, pg_config) is on the PATH.
pg_config, in turn, will locate the necessary #include files and
libraries to build the module.

NOTE THAT ON WINDOWS, THE DLL's FOR THE POSTGRES LIBRARY MUST BE ON
THE PATH AT RUNTIME.

3. Documentation

The 'doc' subdirectory in this release contains a set of reference
manual entries for tdbc::postgres.  Files with an extension '.n' are
for Tcl classes and commands; files with an extension '.3' are for C
library functions. The file, 'doc/tdbcpostgres.n' gives an overview,
listing the classes and functions

4. See also

More information about TDBC and its drivers are available in the
README file for TDBC itself; refer to that file for compilation and
installation instructions, and support information.
