.\" portgroup.7
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Paul Guyot <pguyot@kallisys.net>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The MacPorts Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"    this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd February 5, 2007
.Dt XCODE 7 "MacPorts"
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PortGroup
.Nd MacPorts PortGroup command reference
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm PortGroup gnustep 1.0
.Nm PortGroup perl5 1.0
.Nm PortGroup python24 1.0
.Nm PortGroup python25 1.0
.Nm PortGroup python30 1.0
.Nm PortGroup ruby 1.0
.Nm PortGroup xcode 1.0
.Sh DESCRIPTION
MacPorts defines the notion of PortGroup classes with the PortGroup command.
These classes factorize the work for similar ports.  Port maintainers willing to
use
.Nm PortGroup
need to have some notion of Portfiles. See
.Xr portfile 7
.Pp
.Sh XCODE PORTGROUP
.Nm PortGroup xcode
is here to easily port Xcode-based opensource software. It handles
configuration, build and destroot phases. It also defines some values
for Xcode-based software. A minimum Portfile using the xcode PortGroup class
only defines the fetch and the checksum phases.
.Pp
Using
.Nm PortGroup xcode
is a way to make your port more robust to Xcode version updates as the PortGroup
is tested against all supported Mac OS X and Xcode versions.
.Sh XCODE PORTGROUP SUGAR
Portfiles using xcode PortGroup do not need to define the following variables:
.Bl -tag -width lc
.It Ic categories
.Sy Default:
.Em aqua
.br
.It Ic platforms
.Sy Default:
.Em macosx
.br
.It Ic use_configure
.Sy Default:
.Em no
.El
.br
Moreover, Portfiles using
.Nm PortGroup xcode
do not need to define any build or destroot phase.  Some options are provided
for tailoring these phases to what the software requires.
.Sh XCODE PORTGROUP SPECIFIC VARIABLES
Portfiles using xcode PortGroup may define the following variables:
.Bl -tag -width lc
.It Ic xcode.project
path (relative to ${build.dir} and ${destroot.dir}) of the Xcode project. If
unset, let xcode tool figure it out. It usually succeeds if there is a single
project in the directory.
.br
.Sy Type:
.Em optional
.br
.Sy Example:
.Dl xcode.project ${name}.xcode
.br
.It Ic xcode.configuration
Project configuration/buildstyle to use.
.br
.Sy Type:
.Em optional
.br
.Sy Default:
.Em Deployment
.br
.Sy Example:
.Dl xcode.configuration Main
.br
.It Ic xcode.target
If present, overrides build.target and destroot.target.
.br
.Sy Type:
.Em optional
.br
.It Ic xcode.build.settings
Additional settings passed to the xcode build tool during the build phase.
These settings should be in the X=Y form.
.br
.Sy Type:
.Em optional
.br
.Sy Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
xcode.build.settings FRAMEWORK_SEARCH_PATHS=${prefix}/Library/Frameworks
.Ed
.It Ic xcode.destroot.type
Type of project that will be installed. This tells Xcode PortGroup how to
destroot the project. Correct values are application and framework.
.br
.Sy Type:
.Em optional
.br
.Sy Default:
.Em application
.br
.Sy Example:
.Dl xcode.destroot.type framework
.br
.It Ic xcode.destroot.path
Where to install the build product.
.br
.Sy Type:
.Em optional
.br
.Sy Default:
.Em ${prefix}/Library/Frameworks
or
.Em /Applications/MacPorts depending on xcode.destroot.type
.br
.It Ic xcode.destroot.settings
Additional settings passed to the xcode build tool during the destroot phase.
These settings should be in the X=Y form.
.br
.Sy Type:
.Em optional
.br
.Sy Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
xcode.destroot.settings SKIP_INSTALL=NO
.Ed
.El
.Sh STANDARD PORTFILE VARIABLES AFFECTING XCODE PORTGROUP
The following standard Portfile variables actually affect
.Nm xcode PortGroup.
In most cases, you will not need to set any of these variables in the Portfile.
.Bl -tag -width lc
.It Ic destroot
Where to destroot the project.
.br
.It Ic build.cmd
The command to invoke to build the project.
.Nm xcode PortGroup
sets this variable to ${xcodebuildcmd}.
.br
.It Ic build.target
The Xcode target to build.
.Nm xcode PortGroup
sets this variable to "", thus building all targets. This variable will be
ignored if xcode.target is set.
.br
.It Ic build.pre_args
Additional parameters for ${build.cmd}.
.br
.Sy Default:
none
.br
.It Ic build.args
Main parameters for ${build.cmd}.
.br
.Sy Default:
.Em build
.br
.It Ic build.post_args
Additional parameters for ${build.cmd}.
.br
.Sy Default:
none
.br
.It Ic build.dir
Where to build the project from (i.e. where the Xcode project is).
.br
.Sy Default:
${worksrcpath}
.br
.It Ic destroot.cmd
The command to invoke to destroot the project.
.Nm xcode PortGroup
sets this variable to xcodebuildcmd.
.br
.It Ic destroot.target
The Xcode target to install.
.Nm xcode PortGroup
sets this variable to "", thus installing all targets. This variable will be
ignored if xcode.target is set.
.br
.It Ic destroot.pre_args
Additional parameters for ${destroot.cmd}.
.br
.Sy Default:
none
.br
.It Ic destroot.args
Main parameters for ${destroot.cmd}.
.br
.Sy Default:
.Em install
.br
.It Ic destroot.post_args
Additional parameters for ${destroot.cmd}.
.br
.Sy Default:
none
.br
.It Ic destroot.dir
Where to destroot the project from (i.e. where the Xcode project is).
.br
.Sy Default:
${worksrcpath}
.br
.El
.Sh GNUSTEP PORTGROUP
.Nm PortGroup gnustep
is here to easily port GNUstep-based opensource software using the GNU 
objective-C runtime. It handles configuration, build and destroot phases.
It also defines some values for GNUstep-based software. A minimum Portfile 
using the gnustep PortGroup class only defines the fetch and the checksum phases.
.Sh GNUSTEP FILESYSTEM LAYOUTS
.Nm PortGroup gnustep
also supports both the traditionnal gnustep file layout and the new fhs file layout.
However, the ports themselves do not necessarily support both.
The Portfiles have access to many procedures in dealing with these two layouts :
.Bl -tag -width lc
.It Ic set_gnustep_make
Sets GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES according to the FilesystemLayout
.br
.It Ic set_gnustep_env
Sets DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH and PATH for the gnustep FilesystemLayout
.br
.It Ic gnustep_layout
Returns true (1) if current file layout is gnustep
.br
.It Ic set_system_library
Sets GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_LIBRARY according to the FilesystemLayout
.br
.It Ic set_local_library
Sets GNUSTEP_LOCAL_LIBRARY according to the FilesystemLayout
.br
.El
.Pp
.Sh GNUSTEP PORTGROUP SUGAR
Portfiles using gnustep PortGroup do not need to define the following variables:
.Bl -tag -width lc
.It Ic categories
.Sy Default:
.Em gnustep
.br
.It Ic homepage
.Sy Default:
.Em http://www.gnustep.org/
.br
.It Ic master_sites
.Sy Default:
.Em gnustep:core
.br
.It Ic depends_lib
.Sy Default:
.Em gnustep-core
.br
.It Ic use_configure
.Sy Default:
.Em no
.It Ic configure.env
.Sy Default:
.Em DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH PATH
.It Ic configure.pre_args-append
.Sy Default:
.Em CC=gcc-mp-4.2 GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES
.br
.It Ic build.type
.Sy Default:
.Em gnu
.br
.It Ic build.env
.Sy Default:
.Em DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH PATH
.It Ic build.pre_args-append
.Sy Default:
.Em messages=yes
.br
.It Ic destroot.env
.Sy Default:
.Em DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH PATH
.It Ic destroot.pre_args-append
.Sy Default:
.Em messages=yes
.br
.br
.El
.br
Moreover, Portfiles using
.Nm PortGroup gnustep
do not need to define any build or destroot phase.  Some options are provided
for tailoring these phases to what the software requires.  A mechanism is also
provided to ease the patch process.
.Sh GNUSTEP PORTGROUP SPECIFIC VARIABLES
Portfiles using 
.Nm gnustep PortGroup 
may define the following variables:
.Bl -tag -width lc
.It Ic gnustep.post_flags
an associative array which specifies the sub-directories relative to ${worksrcpath}
and the SHARED_LD_POSTFLAGS variables to be added to GNUmakefile.preamble in those
sub-directories.  This helps making the patching process easier on Darwin.
.br
.Sy Type:
.Em optional
.br
.Sy Example:
.Dl platform darwin {
.Dl		array set gnustep.post_flags {
.Dl			BundleSubDir  """-lfoo -lbar""
.Dl		}
.Dl }
.br
.It Ic gnustep.cc
.br
.Sy Type:
.Em optional
.br
.Sy Default:
.Em gcc-mp-4.2
.br
.Sy Example:
.Dl gnustep.cc gcc-mp-4.3
.br
.It Ic variant with_docs
Many GNUstep packages include a Documentation sub-directory that is not
built by default.  Enabling this variant builds and installs the included 
documentation.
.br
.Sy Type:
.Em optional
.br
.Sy Example:
.Dl port install gnustep-gui +with_docs
.br
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr port 1 ,
.Xr macports.conf 5 ,
.Xr portfile 7 ,
.Xr portstyle 7 ,
.Xr porthier 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "Paul Guyot" Aq pguyot@kallisys.net
.An "Yves de Champlain" Aq yves@macports.org
