.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)hier.7	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man7/hier.7,v 1.29.2.17 2003/01/13 21:43:50 ceri Exp $
.\"
.\" Take from FreeBSD and adjusted to MacPortss' needs.
.Dd June 1, 2007
.Dt PORTHIER 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm porthier
.Nd layout of the ports-filesystems
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A sketch of the filesystem hierarchy as it is applied on ports being distributed by MacPorts.
.Bl -tag -width "/Applications/"
.It Pa ${prefix}/
The base of the MacPorts filesystem hierarchy. By default set to "/opt/local/"
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "include/"
.It Pa bin/
common utilities, programming tools, and applications
.It Pa etc/
system configuration files and scripts
.It Pa include/
standard C include files
.It Pa lib/
archive libraries
.It Pa libexec/
system daemons & system utilities (executed by other programs)
.It Pa Library/Frameworks/
Native macOS Library Frameworks
.It Pa sbin/
system programs and administration utilities
.It Pa share/
architecture-independent files
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "locale/" -compact
.It Pa doc/
miscellaneous documentation
.It Pa info/
GNU Info hypertext system
.It Pa java/
applications based on Java
.It Pa locale/
localization files
.It Pa man/
manual pages
.It Pa misc/
misc system-wide ASCII text files
.El
.Pp
.It Pa src/
source code
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "macports/" -compact
.It Pa macports/
MacPorts package building topdir
.Pp
.El
.It Pa var/
multi-purpose log, temporary, transient, and spool files
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "spool/" -compact
.It Pa db/
misc. automatically generated system-specific database files
.It Pa macports/
MacPorts runtime data
.Bl -tag -width "build/" -compact
.It Pa build/
Where ports are built and destrooted
.It Pa distfiles/
Holds the distfiles of the fetched ports
.It Pa receipts/
Obsolete. Formerly held the registry information and receipts for the installed ports,
in flat-file format.
.It Pa registry/
Contains the registry database in sqlite format.
.It Pa software/
Holds compressed images of the installed ports. These
are extracted to ${prefix} when activated.
.It Pa sources/
Holds the sources of both the porttree (the Portfiles) and the
sources for the base system
.Pp
.El
.It Pa spool/
directory containing output spool files
.It Pa log/
misc. system log files
.It Pa run/
system information files describing various info about
system since it was booted
.El
.Pp
.It Pa www/
files to be served by a http server
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "cgi-bin/" -compact
.It Pa cgi-bin/
directory for cgi executables
.El
.El
.It Pa /Applications/MacPorts/
Native macOS applications
.Pp
.El
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr port 1 ,
.Xr macports.conf 5 ,
.Xr portfile 7 ,
.Xr portgroup 7 ,
.Xr portstyle 7 ,
.Xr hier 7
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual page appeared first in MacPorts. Lots of it is based on hier(7).
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "Felix Kronlage" Aq fkr@opendarwin.org
.An "Juan Manuel Palacios" Aq jmpp@macports.org
