.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Eric Melville <eric@opendarwin.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Eric Melville AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 31, 2005
.Dt PORTSTYLE 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm portstyle
.Nd style guide for ports their associated files
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A port consists of a directory and its contents, within a category subdirectory
of the root of the ports tree.
This document serves as a reference for the directory structure of a single
port and the layout of the files within.
.Pp
The only required file in a port is
.Va Portfile .
The port file should be thought of as a set of declarations rather than a
piece of code.
It is best to format the port file is if it were a table consisting of keys
and values.
In fact, the simplest of ports will only contain a small block of values.
Therefore, whitespace should not be strown about haphazardly.
Nicely formatted compact tables will result in more values being visible at the
same time.
.Pp
At the top of the port file is the requirement statement.
There is a single space between the
.Dq Li PortSystem
statement and the version number.
.Pp
Use tabs to align items into columns.
The left side should consist of single words, and will be separated from the
more complex right side by a number of tabs that will result in all items
begining on the same column.
Variable assignments such as
.Dq Li set libver
can be considered a single word on the left side, with a single space between
.Dq set
and the variable name, followed by tabs to line up with the right side.
.Pp
The first category listed for a port is the port's primary category and should
coincide with the subdirectory that the port resides in.
Additional categories can be listed, but should be descriptive and accurate.
.Pp
Obviously a simple table of values won't do for all ports.
More complicated ports will need to have things like multiple distribution
files, custom targets, and variants.
When items require multiple lines, they can be separated from the previous
and next items with a blank line.
Indent the additional lines to the same column that the right side begins on
in the first line.
Should the items require
.Dq Li {}
braces, the braces may appear on the first and last lines rather than on their
own lines.
This is done because the right side of the port file is already indented, and
to make port file read like a table.
Use a single space after the brace.
Indent additional lines to this same column.
If a single statement needs to span multiple lines, use a 2 space indentation
from the first line for all additional lines.
.Pp
Variants are like any other part of the port file.
Space, indent, and format them the same way other sections are formatted.
The actual variant statement,
.Dq Li variant
followed by the name of the variant, can be treated as a single statement and
thus placed together on the left side and separated by a single space.
.Pp
Sometimes it is useful to have a block of raw code for a port file.
In these cases, either place the code at the bottom of the port file or pull it
in from an external file, and simply format it in a well-structured manner
with sensible indentation like any other code should be.
.Pp
Patch files reside in the files/ directory in the port's base directory.
There should be one patch file for every file that needs to be patched.
It is perfectly reasonable to use provided patches that affect multiple files,
but do not create new patches that do so.
Their names should begin with
.Dq Li patch- .
The rest of the name should come from the name of the file that they apply to.
In many cases just the base name of the file being patched is enough.
For files such as
.Dq Li Makefile
this may not be the case.
In this case, use enough components of the file's path to uniquely distinguish
the file.
Separate the components with
.Sq Li -
characters.
The patch should apply with
.Dq Li patch -p0
from the working source directory of the port.
.Pp
Try to adhere to these guidelines, but remember that this is only a guide.
No set of rules can adequately cover all cases, and in some cases the best
solution is to break the rules.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr port 1 ,
.Xr macports.conf 5 ,
.Xr portfile 7 ,
.Xr portgroup 7 ,
.Xr porthier 7
.Sh HISTORY
This guide was initially written as a late addition to first release of
MacPorts.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Eric Melville Aq eric@opendarwin.org
